---
title: Introduction
visible: true
---

<p>Safe, sustainable underground mining of any scale is not possible without an effective ventilation system.</p>
<p>Ventilation is required in the underground workings to:</p>
<ul>
<li>Dilute gaseous and particulate pollutants to concentrations which are not injurious to the health and safety of the workforce</li>
<li>Maintain thermal comfort through the provision of adequate air velocity</li>
<li>Assist with maintaining workforce morale and productivity through the provision of high quality underground environmental conditions</li>
</ul>
<p>An efficient and effective mine ventilation system is not achieved by accident. It requires incorporation of a solid understanding of scientific ventilation principles into the very core of the mine planning and management process.</p>
<ul>
<li>The basic requirement for the mine ventilation system is to provide air for people to breath and in a state that will not cause any immediate or future ill effects.</li>
<li>Because of the processes of mining, if positive airflow through the workings was not provided the air would very quickly become stale, contaminated and unfit for human consumption.</li>
<li>The ventilation system must therefore be sufficient to deal with the contaminants released during mining.</li>
<li>If they are not adequately dealt with, as they are identified, they may become at best a discomfort to mine workers, and at worst cause serious or even fatal illness.</li>
</ul>
<p>The prime contaminants produced during mining are</p>
<ul>
<li>Dust</li>
<li>Heat</li>
<li>Gases (including water vapour i.e. Humidity)</li>
</ul>
<p>and the prime method for dealing with these is an effective ventilation system that</p>
<ul>
<li>supplies oxygen and coolth</li>
<li>dilutes dust and gases and</li>
<li>removes the contaminants from the workplace.</li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Factors that affect the underground environment</strong></p>
<p>During the development and operation of a mine or other underground facility, potential hazards arise from dust, gas emissions, heat and humidity, fires, explosions and radiation. Figure 1 shows the factors that may contribute towards those hazards. These divide into features that are imposed by nature and those that are generated by design decisions on how to develop and operate the facility.</p>
<p>The major method of controlling atmospheric conditions in the subsurface is by airflow. This is produced, primarily, by main fans that are usually, but not necessarily, located on surface. National or state mining law may insist that main fans are sited on surface for gassy mines. While the main fan, or combination of main fans, handles all of the air that circulates through the underground network of airways, underground booster fans serve specific districts only. Auxiliary fans are used to pass air through ducts to ventilate blind headings. The distribution of airflow may further be controlled by ventilation doors, stoppings, air crossings and regulators.</p>
<p>It is often the case that it becomes impracticable or impossible to contend with all environmental hazards by ventilation alone. For example, increases in air temperature caused by compression of the air in the downcast shafts of deep mines may result in that air being too hot for personnel even before it enters the workings. No practical amount of increased airflow will solve that problem. Figure 1 includes the ancillary control measures that may be advisable or necessary to supplement the ventilation system in order to maintain acceptable conditions underground.</p>